Good afternoon everyone, welcome back.
You have a good lunch?
Yeah, I see a lot of empty seats.
That usually means either lunch
was really good or really bad.
But we have here the session that was
hinted at several times yesterday.
How many of you remember the EJB session?
How many of you have
digested all of it yet?
A handful of you, yeah.
So you might also think
about retitling this session
Caching In on Synchronization,
because as you learned yesterday,
one of the real advantages of
WebObjects has is incredibly powerful
mechanisms for caching and synchronizing
data across multiple object stores
running on multiple systems,
not just the sort of
heavyweight "who am I,
here am I" kind of
things you get with EJB.
And to tell you all about that,
here is Daniel Abrams.
Please give him a warm welcome.
Thanks.
It's really great to see everyone.
I'm frankly amazed at how many
WebObjects people were getting into these
sessions and a little intimidated too,
but we'll go ahead.
Like Ernie said,
the name of this session is
Caching and Synchronization.
And at a very high level,
it's a very simple concept.
Caching in the sense of grabbing
data from an external data
store like a relational database
and displaying it to users.
And the real issue is how fresh that
data is that your users are seeing
and a balance between hitting that
external store and caching that data so
that you're not hitting it too often.
But as a consequence, users might not be
seeing the freshest data.
And synchronization,
which is taking changes that your
users make to objects and applying them
back to the database in an orderly,
organized way.
So we'll jump right
into it and get started.
I want to divide the
presentation into two parts.
I want to divide the presentation
into essentially three parts.
The first part, at a high level,
we'll use the slides to go
over some of the caching and
synchronization issues and solutions.
We'll jump into a little demo
app that I've prepared to
demonstrate some of these things.
And then we'll get into the Q&A and
hopefully get a constructive
discussion going about how to
deal with some of these things.
Before we get started,
I did want to sort of get a show of hands
just to see the level we should go at.
How many people here have a good sense
of what an EOFetch specification is,
how to deal with it,
have used that before?
Okay.
So maybe half, I would say.
Which means that we're probably
going to lose some of you,
at least in the PowerPoint part
of the presentation.
And hopefully we'll bring
you back in with the demo.
But let's get right to it.
So I'm Daniel Abrams.
I work out in the field as a
consulting engineer and I've been
building web applications with
WebObjects for about three years now,
large scale, small scale,
all sorts of different types.
So I've run into these issues over
and over again and I think I have
a pretty good and broad perspective
on how to fix these things.
And I think if you've built WebObjects
applications out in the field at all,
you've probably run into
these issues as well.
So this is what I want to cover.
I want to go over the default
WebObjects EOF deployment scenario
that is out of the box when you go
to deploy a WebObjects application.
What does that look like and
what effect does that have on
caching and synchronization?
I want to go over
fetching and snapshotting.
Snapshotting is sort of at the heart of
the synchronization and caching issues,
committing and receiving changes
and coordinating updates.
So this is what the default
deployment scenario looks like.
You essentially have a whole bunch of
client browsers out in the real world.
You have a bunch of client
browsers out in the real world.
You could have one or more web
servers and WebObjects adapters,
but let's take the simple
situation where you have one.
And it's very likely that if you
have any sort of volume at all
coming into your application,
you have multiple application instances.
So if you look at this slide,
you'll see we have instance
one and instance two.
And within each instance,
we have multiple editing contexts
sitting on top of a shared EOF stack.
So that's essentially what you
get out of the box with WebObjects
without making any changes to the
the default deployment scenario.
So I wanted to spend a little
time talking about snapshots
because I think that if you
understand how snapshots work,
how broadcasts occur and what's going
on behind the scenes with your data,
then you can figure out any given
caching or synchronization issue.
There's the master repository
for coordinating all data
retrieval and updates.
And by default, in a single instance,
you have editing context
sharing a set of snapshots.
So these are some of the issues that
when I go in and I see clients who
have built WebObjects applications,
they talk about or they say,
"Why is it that I'm not
seeing the freshest data?
Or why am I seeing the
application hit the database,
but my users aren't seeing that data
show up?" So let's talk a little bit
about how fetching occurs in WebObjects.
So one thing before we get into this
that I wanted to go over was that
when you do have multiple application
instances in a deployment scenario,
by default, they're not communicating
with each other at all.
So this leads into the first level
of complexity of what would seem to
be a relatively simple situation.
We're about to see a number
of behaviors where within a
single application instance,
editing contexts are communicating with
one another because they share a shared
stack and a shared set of snapshots.
But when we're in multiple instances,
there's no communication going on
whatsoever between those instances.
So if an editing context in one instance
makes an update to the database,
the editing contexts that sit in the
other instance in no way recognize that.
And it's essentially the equivalent
of another application going in and
making a change to the database.
There's no real difference
from within the instance.
So let's talk about a fetch within
a single application instance.
For those who don't know,
for those who weren't familiar with
the concept of fetch specifications,
in EOF,
you essentially can programmatically
construct a fetch specification.
And there's a series of parameters.
When we go over the demo app,
I'll show you how you do that.
That allows you to query a database,
get back a group of objects,
and display them to the user,
if you want to.
So after you've constructed this fetch
specification and triggered a fetch,
we'll obviously query the
database to get the data.
We'll snapshot that object
within that shared stack.
So even though a given editing context,
in this case, editing context one,
has triggered a fetch,
it's actually snapshotted
in a shared location.
So editing context two and editing
context three will eventually
become aware of that object,
as we'll see,
as they either fetch it or manipulate it.
And finally,
we create an object and pull it
into the first editing context.
So now I want to talk about what happens
when an additional editing context
attempts to display the same object.
So in this particular case,
we have editing context to initiating
a fetch on the same object,
an object with global ID 1.
Global ID is just EOF's way of
displaying and packaging up primary keys.
So it's just a way of uniquely
identifying an object.
So in this case,
we do the exact same thing.
Editing context to triggers a fetch
on an object with global ID 1.
We query the database.
And what's significant here is
that when that data comes back,
we actually ignore any
updates to the data.
So
If an external instance or even some
other external application has changed
that data and we simply do a fetch,
the out of the box behavior is
that you're not going to see it.
So this is the first thing that
actually throws people off.
They're not aware of this.
They construct a fetch spec,
they fetch their data,
and they don't see updates,
but they do see the application
hitting the database.
And I'll show you that in the demo.
But it's important to be aware
that that's the default behavior.
So we've ignored updates.
We create an object in Editing Context 2,
but that object is actually
created off the snapshot because
we haven't specified otherwise.
So I want to talk about what you can do
to change that situation if you want to.
Let's say that you always want users
to have fresh data or you want users to
have fresh data in this particular case.
What are some of the things that
you can do to make that happen?
Well, one of the things you can do is on
your fetch specs you can use a method
called Refreshes Refetched Objects.
And if you do that,
when you query the database
and the data comes back,
it updates the snapshot.
So in this case,
Editing Context 3 has triggered
a fetch and they've set that
flag for Refetched Objects to on.
So we query the database and we
can see that the snapshot gets
updated in that shared stack.
Now, there's an additional
wrinkle when this happens.
When we have an update to a snapshot,
all of the editing contexts that
share that stack are referred
to as Peer Editing Context,
receive that change,
receive a broadcast of that change.
So, we can see that when this
snapshot gets updated,
we broadcast out to those editing
contexts that are peers that already
have an instance of that object.
And then we pull that object
into Editing Context 3.
Now, we'll get into more detail later
what happens if Editing Context
1 or Editing Context 2 have made
changes to that object before
that broadcast has occurred.
And what actually happens
is you get a merge.
And we'll talk about that more
when we get it more in detail.
So,
we're going to go into synchronization.
There's an additional wrinkle
I wanted to talk about,
which is specific to 4.5.
So, 4.5 has added a number of different
ways that you can manipulate the way
objects are refreshed or updated.
And they sort of add an additional
level of flexibility to what you can do,
but also an additional layer of
complexity that you have to be aware of.
So, in 4.5, if Editing Context 3
were to trigger a fetch,
this slide shows how the
query database and check
timestamp are actually inverted.
So, what will happen is Editing
Context 3 triggers a fetch.
We will check the timestamp.
If that timestamp has expired,
we'll actually go back to the database.
We'll do a query.
We'll update the snapshot.
And again,
because the snapshot has been updated,
we'll broadcast those changes
So I wanted to talk about one
of the alternative methods that
you can use to update snapshots,
and that's invalidating objects.
So I've added a little bit of
complexity here to the diagram.
What you see in each of the
editing contexts is the object
that we were talking about before,
and it now has a too many relationship,
because relationships are actually
treated a little bit differently.
And again,
we're sort of layering complexity
on top of what we were doing before.
So one thing that happens when you
do a fetch with refresh turned on,
you actually don't update that
object's too many relationships.
So you might see changes to that object,
but you're not going to see changes
to the too many relationship or the
other relationships that it has,
even 2-1 relationships.
So I want to spend a little time
dealing with both alternative ways of
invalidating as well as methods for
dealing with updating relationships.
So in this particular case,
we have editing context one
invalidating the given object
that we were talking about.
And there's two ways to do invalidation.
One is on an individual object,
and one is to invalidate every
object in either the editing
context or within the stack.
We'll deal with individually first,
and then we'll move on
to invalidating globally.
So when editing context one
triggers this invalidation,
we refault the object.
We refault its too many relationships,
but we preserve its 2-1 relationship.
Thank you.
When editing context
one trips that fault,
we see a series of
actions occur as a result.
We first query the database
against that object,
so we now have a fault for that
object and it specifically queries
for that particular object.
We update the snapshot
and update that object,
and then we broadcast those changes out
because the snapshot has been updated.
Now there's one additional wrinkle here,
which is that the broadcast actually
occurs a little differently than it
does when you have refreshes turned on.
In the case of refresh,
when you broadcast out in editing
context two or editing context three,
if you had a dirty object,
that is an object that
someone has modified,
that broadcast would
merge in those changes.
When you invalidate an object,
by default,
if you don't do anything else,
it will overwrite those changes
and the users in the other editing
contexts will lose their changes.
So in some ways,
invalidating is a more powerful tool,
but in some ways you have
to do it in a different way.
So in some ways,
invalidating is a more powerful tool,
but in some ways you have
to do it differently.
So in some ways,
invalidating is a more powerful tool,
but in some ways,
but in some ways, you have to be careful
because you could potentially
overwrite other users' changes.
So right now we have this object
with global ID 1 pulled into
each of the editing contexts,
but we still have the too
many relationship faulted,
and I want to go over what happens
when that fault is tripped as well.
So when the too many
relationship fault is stripped,
we will create a database for
that too many relationship,
just like it did the first time,
but it will actually discard the changes.
So you will not see any updates to
the too many relationship when you
invalidate an object like that,
and then it will pull that relationship
in from the existing snapshot.
So invalidating objects
individually is an effective
way to update the given object,
but it will not work for updating
changes to a too many relationship.
And actually, as an additional wrinkle,
it will query the database
against that relationship.
So I'll show you the demo app,
and users are sometimes confused
because they see that query occur,
but you don't see changes.
So finally,
the most drastic thing you can
do is invalidate all the objects.
When you invalidate all the objects,
essentially everything,
either in the editing
context or the shared stack,
is refaulted.
So every object is refaulted,
every relationship is refaulted.
Every time you trip one of those faults,
you're going to have a new query.
Every snapshot is updated.
All those changes are broadcast,
including too many.
So when you invalidate all the objects,
you will
update the TooMany's that's an
effective way of pulling in new
data through your TooMany's,
but there's a lot of really
significant issues associated
with invalidating all objects.
One is that it's very expensive, period,
to try and pull every single object as
you trip them back into the database.
And two is,
it can actually be more expensive
than your original queries.
So if you pull in a bunch of
objects into editing context
through a series of queries,
you pull those objects
in in sets at a time,
right?
So you might pull in objects
five or ten at a time.
Unless you recreate every single
one of those original queries when
you have to even validate it all,
it's going to trigger a fetch
individually on each of those
objects as you trip the faults.
The other issue is that it will
wipe out any changes to any editing
context that share those objects.
So if editing context one invalidates
all objects and editing context two,
editing context three happen to
be making changes to those objects
or deleted those objects but
haven't committed those changes,
those changes will be lost.
So,
One user will have the freshest data,
but another user may simply lose
data behind the scenes without
really realizing what's going on.
So you have to be very careful
when you do that to ensure that
your users don't lose data.
And then the other thing to
be aware of is that with every
single one of these mechanisms,
when you actually go to
deploy an application,
a user may end up on one
instance or multiple instances.
Actually,
a better way to say that is that users
may end up on a shared instance or they
may end up across application instances.
So if they end up on a shared
application instance and you're
doing things like updating fetches
with refresh or invalidating objects,
then those two users who are editing
the same object are going to see
changes as a result of those broadcasts.
If by random chance they happen to end up
on two different application instances,
even if your code is exactly the same,
they're going to see a different
set of behavior changes.
So potentially users are going to
be very confused unless you're very
careful about the way you're doing
this because from their perspective,
they're doing the exact same thing.
But from the perspective of
the WebObjects application
instances that are running,
they're either not communicating
with each other or they aren't,
just depending on where
those users ended up.
You particularly start to get into
these issues when you talk about
coordinating changes and different
users having the ability to edit
the same object at the same time.
I want to start going
over some of those things,
talk a bit about the locking
behavior in EOF and how it works,
explain why sometimes users see that
locking and sometimes they don't,
and explain why relationships can change.
So let's talk about committing changes
within a single application instance.
So what we're looking at
here is editing context one,
modifying and committing
changes to an object.
It has a too many relationship.
We won't worry about that right now.
And as you can see,
all of the other objects are in
line with what's in the snapshot.
So what I mean is in editing context two,
you can see that there haven't
been any changes to the object.
The data in editing context two is the
same data that's in the snapshot and
the same with editing context three.
So right now,
the only user who's committed changes
to an object is in editing context one.
He modifies the object and commits.
He goes to save to the database.
So we see an update to the database.
The snapshot is updated.
And again,
every time the snapshot is updated,
we're going to broadcast out those
changes to other editing contexts,
that is,
other users who are sharing a stack.
So, okay, good.
Before it was getting cut off,
but I think it's okay.
So in this particular case,
I want to talk about what happens
when two users within the same
application instance modify and
attempt to commit changes to an
object at essentially the same time.
So, editing context one and edit
context two modify an object.
So, editing context one and editing
context two are now out of sync
with what's in the snapshot.
They haven't committed their changes,
but they're carrying around locally dirty
versions of this object with global ID 1.
Editing Context 1 goes
to commit its change.
We update the database,
checking to make sure that we
don't have a locking failure,
which in this case we don't.
The snapshot was in sync with
what was in the database.
The snapshot is then updated and
the changes are broadcast out.
You notice Editing Context 3
has received that broadcast,
while Editing Context 2
receives that broadcast,
but essentially maintains
its own changes.
We'll attempt to merge in those changes
and where there's discrepancies,
Editing Context 2 will reapply
the changes that it's already
made and maintain those changes.
And the other thing to note is
that right now the snapshot is in
sync with what's in the database.
So,
Editing Context 1 has committed a change.
We updated the database.
We updated the snapshot.
So, those two are in sync.
And that's important because this
is essentially EOF's mechanism
for doing optimistic locking.
Right?
So, what happens when you go to save a
change is we compare what's in the
snapshot with what's in the database.
And if they're out of sync,
we have an optimistic locking failure.
And as long as those two are in sync,
we're not going to get an optimistic
locking failure and we're going to
be allowed to update those changes.
So,
let's look at what happens when Editing
Context 2 goes to commit its changes.
The database is updated because,
like I said,
the snapshot was in sync with what's
in the database and we broadcast those
changes out to the other objects.
So the important thing to note here
is that the out-of-the-box behavior
is even when you have an attribute
on a given object marked for locking,
within the same application instance
they share the same stack by default,
they share the same set of snapshots,
so you're not going to see one editing
context that's a pure of another
attempt to lock against each other.
Now I want to talk about the
exact same behavior within
multiple editing contexts.
So in this case we have editing
context one and editing context
three modifying an object.
You can see that they're in
different application instances and
attempting to commit those changes.
So, editing context one and three,
modify the object, and you can see that.
Editing Context 1 updates the database
and we lock against the snapshot.
So in this particular case,
the database is in
sync with the snapshot.
We don't have any problems with locking.
The snapshot is updated,
and we broadcast out to
the other shared instances.
So editing context 2 is now aware
of the fact that we've committed
this update to the database,
whereas editing context 3 and
editing context 4 are not.
And just to be perfectly clear,
from a user's perspective,
there's really no difference.
They could have ended up in
the first application instance,
and they could have
ended up in the second.
They could be editing
context 2 or 3 or 4.
They really don't know what editing
context they're going in the beginning.
So let's see what happens when
editing context three commits
changes to the database.
We go to lock against the
snapshot and in this case we fail,
right, because we have a snapshot
that has been updated,
or rather a database that has
been updated since the last
time we've updated the snapshot.
So editing context one,
or rather application instance one,
updated the database.
Editing context two goes to update
that database and it's going to fail
with an optimistic locking failure.
So I wanted to go right to the demo
and show you some of these behaviors.
There's actually some additional
wrinkles that come into play when you're
doing this in a real world situation.
So from a high level,
or from an application instance level,
this is exactly what happens.
But because the web
is a stateless medium,
there's some additional wrinkles that are
introduced when you have a web browser
that has a chance to get out of sync
with what's actually in your application.
So if we could cut over
to the demo machine,
that'd be good.
So the demo is about as
simple as you can get.
This is the EO model for the demo.
You can see we have an object called
movie here with a too many relationship
to role and a 2-1 relationship to studio.
And essentially I've
constructed a demo that
[Transcript missing]
So these two different sessions,
and I'm going to start to make
some changes to the objects.
So I've done a fetch,
and I've pulled all the objects into
each of the associated editing contexts.
Right now they're on the
same application instance,
and I'm going to make a change.
So I'm going to go behind the
scenes and I'm going to edit
one of the objects directly.
So I'm going to edit the
movie's description and change
this from labor union history,
let's say, to labor union movie.
So right now you would
expect that if I did a fetch,
I probably wouldn't see that change
according to what I told you.
So let's go ahead and do that.
And before we do that,
I just want to pull up what's
going on so you can see.
So we do a fetch against those movies.
You can see that
We've hit the database.
We've actually pulled
back all three movies,
but we don't see that change, right?
So I want to do the same thing,
but this time I'll do a fetch
and refresh the snapshot.
So according to what I've told you,
if you fetch and refresh the snapshot,
you should pull back from the database,
update that snapshot,
broadcast out to the other instances,
and you should see the change.
So let's do that.
Sure enough, we see the change.
But I want to introduce
an additional wrinkle.
So let's actually go to the
other application instance and
let's do something similar.
Let's do fetch and refresh,
and you would expect that
you might see the change,
right?
But you're not.
So in this particular case,
we're still seeing labor union movie,
whereas in this particular case,
we see the old value,
labor union history.
And if you go into the console,
You can see that sure enough,
I'll demonstrate it just
to be absolutely sure,
that when we go in and fetch,
sure enough, we're hitting the database,
but we're not seeing any updates.
So what's going on here?
Well, what's going on is that
When this first session went
and refreshed the snapshot,
it broadcast out those changes
to all the other instances.
So it pulled that data into
its own editing context,
so we saw the change.
It then broadcast that change out to
the editing context that's sitting
on the server that is represented
by this particular session.
But when this session went
back to do a fetch and refresh,
it synchronized the bindings.
So it took the values,
labor union history,
that was saved within this overview,
compared it to the values it had,
which had been broadcast
out from the other object,
and noticed they were different,
and assumed that this particular
user was actually making changes.
So from this user's perspective,
he hasn't made any changes at all.
And not only has he not
made any changes at all,
but he's committed an
action that you would think,
and that he would think,
would send him to... to the latest data.
But in fact, it hasn't done that at all,
and in fact,
committing this action has cemented
this older version of the object
right back into the editing context.
So if we were to hit save changes,
which does nothing more than an
editing context save changes,
so it merely saves unchanged
objects within his editing context,
it will actually update
the database at this point.
So I'll go ahead and do that.
So we can see that it's
updated the database.
So without either user being aware of it,
we've actually managed to overwrite
the commit that the first user's done
and replace it with an older value.
So this isn't even a case where two users
are attempting to edit the same data,
but there's still one user fighting
against another and overwriting the data.
And what's actually sort of interesting,
I want to do the same thing,
but rather than fetch
and refresh the snapshot,
which in this case is a
button which submits the form,
I want to follow this hyperlink
that says "Do Nothing," which
is essentially a no-op action.
It simply returns the same page.
But before I do that,
I want to clear out all the changes.
So in both cases,
I'll invalidate all the objects.
So we're completely up to date right now.
I will commit to change the
database from the back end.
So we'll change this back to labor union.
I'll just get rid of the word altogether.
So we're up to date in that.
In this case,
we'll fetch and refresh snapshots
exactly like we did before,
and we can see that it's gone.
But in this case, we're going to follow
the do-nothing hyperlink.
And you can see we're up to date.
So what's the difference here?
The difference is that
when we follow a hyperlink,
we don't actually submit any
of the data that's in the form.
We don't update those bindings.
And so we see the update
that's been broadcast out to
us in the editing context.
So the other thing I want to
demonstrate is a very similar behavior,
but with regards to
too many relationships.
So let's clear everything out again.
This time I'm going to
make a change to an EO,
but I'm going to make the change
directly to one of the relationships.
So I've now made a change
to this role right here.
And in this particular case,
why don't we start by doing a fetch?
So I'll do a fetch,
and you can see that we don't see
the change to the relationship,
which is probably what you'd expect.
And if we go to the console,
you can see that even though
we don't see that change,
we've actually gone out
and hit the database again.
So let's do the same thing,
but let's this time do a fetch and
movies and refresh the snapshot.
Well, what do we have in this case?
We again go out and hit the database.
We again pull back those three rows,
but we again haven't seen that update.
Okay,
why don't we try invalidating that movie?
So we invalidate that movie.
And again, we don't see that change.
Let's look at what's going
on behind the scenes.
You can see that we do a
fetch against the movie,
so we pull back that particular movie,
the one that we've invalidated.
We've also refaulted its
too many relationship,
so we actually pull back
those new roles right here,
but you're still not seeing it.
So the point is that
even when you invalidate,
you're not necessarily getting
updates to a too many relationship.
So this time, let's invalidate all.
So we do an invalidate all.
You can see that we've actually
gotten that update to that object.
But I mean, we really have a flurry
of database activity,
right?
We've hit the database once
for every single movie,
whereas before we were pulling
back three movies at a time.
And that's because we're
essentially iterating over an
array with these movies in them.
And rather than fetching,
we're simply pulling
all those movies back.
And then we're also fetching
back each of the relationships,
so the too many and the too ones.
But in this particular case,
when we pull back the too many,
we can see that it's updated.
So the other thing I wanted to show
you was the difference in behavior
between when you update within a
single instance versus when you
update within shared instances.
So let's make a change.
Actually, I think we're invalidated,
but just to be sure,
let's clear out the entire cache.
Let's make a change.
So I have overview.
I don't know if you noticed in the model,
but I have overview designated
as a locking attribute.
So you would expect that if two
different users make changes to
an overview behind the scenes that
you should lock on that attribute.
So when they're within
the same editing context,
or sorry,
when they have the same shared stack,
but so you have editing context that
share a stack and we commit saves.
We're just going to see that
they can override each other.
So let's take a look
at that in the console.
So we have two sets of
updates right there,
and we haven't detected any
conflicts because the snapshots are
always in sync with the database.
So even though those particular
attributes are marked for locking,
we're able to update.
But let's simulate the
exact same behavior within
separate editing contexts.
So we'll start over.
Pull the plug.
Make a change behind the scenes.
I'll attempt to make a change.
So this is, like I said,
analogous to a user in another
application instance committing
a change to the database.
And we'll also commit a change in this
editing context and attempt to save it.
And what you can see is that we've got
an optimistic locking failure occurring.
So the exact same behavior could result
in the user seeing either an update
to the data or a locking failure,
depending on which application
instance they end up in.
So there's actually a couple
other things we could demo,
but I think I'd rather just
jump right to questions and
then as people have questions,
maybe we'll demo that behavior in there.
So I'd like to bring Steve Miner
and Eric Nui-Yao up to the stage.
They're both part of the
WebObjects engineering team
and open it up for questions.
First of all,
a big hand for our presenters.
Thank you very much.